---
title: "Introduction"
description: ""
weight: 100
---

**NLX** is an open source peer-to-peer system facilitating federated authentication, secure connecting and protocolling in a large-scale, dynamic API ecosystem with many organisations.

The need for the creation of NLX arises from the [Common Ground vision](https://github.com/VNG-Realisatie/common-ground), which aims to convert or replace the current monolithic information systems of Dutch municipalities (and wider government) with a state of the art, API-first software landscape, fulfilling societal demand for automation, transparency and privacy.

In this vision, everyone should be able to use API's in other organisations as easy as their own, while core data objects should only be manipulated by the one administratively responsible and used by all others. An additional advantage is that public data can easily be made available to everyone. To make this technically feasible in a controllable manner, NLX comes in play.

**Warning**: Please note the current NLX software only serves as a **proof of concept** and is therefore **not** suitable for production usage.

## High level business overview

Starting with NLX implies starting with API’s. Organizations that are willing to provide public services or consume existing API’s should consider adopting NLX. Currently the NLX team provides an open source code base in which your organizations developers can participate. However developers aren’t necessarily. You can use NLX as is and the team will support your system engineers to learn the concepts of NLX and set up the first test and production implementation. Only basic knowledge of IT, the internet, API's and security are required.

Setting up the first Outway for testing is done in a matter of a few hours, setting up an Inway requires having a basic API and a publicly resolvable URL so this is usually done in a day or maybe two. Launching a service on a public available network (the internet) requires more than just bringing the NLX and API software to production. A project should address all functional and non functional requirements and business context before launch. Depending on the service this wil take a few weeks or months.

Over all consuming API’s is much more straightforward and easy compared to providing an API. When new to API’s one should start with consuming API’s. For example the [BAG API](https://zakelijk.kadaster.nl/-/bag-api) of the Dutch Kadaster or the [KVK API](https://developers.kvk.nl/) of the Dutch Chamber of Commerce.

Providing API’s trough NLX is quite straightforward when the API’s are already available. Suitable API’s to start with as a provider are two examples of API’s that Amsterdam has made available. Consider providing an API for monuments or garbage bin’s by reusing the already developed API specifications: [Monumenten API](https://api.data.amsterdam.nl/monumenten) or [Afval API](https://api.data.amsterdam.nl/afval/).

The business benefits of adopting NLX for consuming and providing API’s is the increase in security, flexibility, maintainability and privacy as well as contributing to the Common Ground and adopting cutting edge technology.


## High level technical overview

Within the NLX integration landscape there are two main concepts: **applications** and **services**. Applications are only available within organizations and usually provide users a **client** interface to query and mutate data. Services provide **API's** to applications and are accessable within and across organizations.

NLX provides a developer friendly way to use standardised resources between organizations. It provides a gateway for querying services on the ecosystem as well as an  gateway to offer services to the ecosystem. NLX provides support for HTTP/1.x services like REST/JSON and SOAP/XML. The support for HTTP/2 (gRPC) is a work in progress.

NLX provides two different types of gateways: the **inway** and **outway**. Through an inway an organization can provide services to the NLX ecosystem and through an outway an organization can query services on the NLX ecosystem. The gateways are usually deployed centrally within the organization although it is possible for one organization to deploy multiple instances of inway and outway on different locations.

<svg class="high-level-overview-illustration" viewBox="0 0 665 139" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"><defs><rect id="a" x="0" y="0" width="300" height="88" rx="5"/><mask id="c" maskContentUnits="userSpaceOnUse" maskUnits="objectBoundingBox" x="0" y="0" width="300" height="88" fill="#fff"><use xlink:href="#a"/></mask><rect id="b" x="365" y="0" width="300" height="88" rx="5"/><mask id="d" maskContentUnits="userSpaceOnUse" maskUnits="objectBoundingBox" x="0" y="0" width="300" height="88" fill="#fff"><use xlink:href="#b"/></mask></defs><g fill="none" fill-rule="evenodd"><path d="M123.068 46l8.672 4.878-.98 1.744-12-6.75-1.55-.872 1.55-.872 12-6.75.98 1.744L123.068 44H168.932l-8.672-4.878.98-1.744 12 6.75 1.55.872-1.55.872-12 6.75-.98-1.744L168.932 46H123.068z" fill="#9B9B9B" fill-rule="nonzero"/><use stroke="#777" mask="url(#c)" stroke-width="4" stroke-dasharray="5,3" xlink:href="#a"/><g transform="translate(25 23)"><rect stroke="#7096FF" stroke-width="2" fill="#FFF" x="1" y="1" width="88" height="42" rx="5"/><text font-family="Muli" font-size="16" font-weight="500" fill="#517FFF"><tspan x="25.165" y="26">Client</tspan></text></g><use stroke="#777" mask="url(#d)" stroke-width="4" stroke-dasharray="5,3" xlink:href="#b"/><g transform="translate(550 20)"><rect stroke="#7096FF" stroke-width="2" fill="#FFF" x="1" y="1" width="88" height="42" rx="5"/><text font-family="Muli" font-size="16" font-weight="500" fill="#517FFF"><tspan x="34.061" y="26">API</tspan></text></g><path d="M270 45c22.395-4 43.062-6 62-6 18.938 0 39.605 2 62 6" stroke="#FFF" stroke-width="5"/><path d="M277.192 45.469l9.371 3.346-.673 1.884-12.966-4.63-1.674-.599 1.38-1.12 10.691-8.676 1.26 1.553-7.726 6.27 7.992-1.366C302.377 39.377 318.762 38 334 38s31.622 1.377 49.166 4.133l7.979 1.364-7.726-6.27 1.26-1.553 10.69 8.676 1.38 1.12-1.673.598-12.966 4.63-.673-1.883 9.37-3.346-7.964-1.363C365.41 41.37 349.13 40 334 40c-15.13 0-31.411 1.369-48.83 4.104l-7.978 1.365z" fill="#9B9B9B" fill-rule="nonzero"/><g transform="translate(177 23)"><rect fill="#7096FF" width="90" height="44" rx="5"/><text font-family="Muli" font-size="16" font-weight="500" fill="#FFF"><tspan x="18.605" y="26">Outway</tspan></text></g><g transform="translate(399 22)"><rect fill="#7096FF" width="90" height="44" rx="5"/><text font-family="Muli" font-size="16" font-weight="500" fill="#FFF"><tspan x="24.597" y="26">Inway</tspan></text></g><text font-family="Muli" font-size="16" font-weight="500" fill="#2C2C2C"><tspan x="64.092" y="135">Requesting application</tspan></text><text font-family="Muli" font-size="16" font-weight="500" fill="#2C2C2C"><tspan x="442.096" y="135">Providing service</tspan></text><path d="M497.068 45l8.672 4.878-.98 1.744-12-6.75-1.55-.872 1.55-.872 12-6.75.98 1.744L497.068 43H542.932l-8.672-4.878.98-1.744 12 6.75 1.55.872-1.55.872-12 6.75-.98-1.744L542.932 45H497.068z" fill="#9B9B9B" fill-rule="nonzero"/></g></svg>

Here you can see a full request-response flow on NLX. An application performs a request on the outway within the same organisation. The outway routes the request to the inway of the organisation providing the service. The inway routes the request to the service. The service responds to the request and this response is routed through the NLX landscape, to the outway and arrives at the application.
